docs/language/aggregate-functions/README.md, before:

# Aggregate Functions

A pipeline may contain one or more _aggregate functions_ that operate on
batches of records to carry out a running computation over the values they
contain.

   * [General Usage](#general-usage)
     + [Invoking](#invoking)
     + [Field Naming](#field-naming)
     + [Grouping](#grouping)
     + [`where` filtering](#where-filtering)
   * [Available Aggregate Functions](#available-aggregate-functions)
     + [`and`](#and)
     + [`any`](#any)
     + [`avg`](#avg)
     + [`collect`](#collect)
     + [`count`](#count)
     + [`countdistinct`](#countdistinct)
     + [`max`](#max)
     + [`min`](#min)
     + [`or`](#or)
     + [`sum`](#sum)
     + [`union`](#union)

> **Note:** Per Zed [search syntax](../search-syntax/README.md), many examples
> below use shorthand that leaves off the explicit leading `* |`, matching all
> records before invoking the first element in a pipeline.

## General Usage

### Invoking

Multiple aggregate functions may be invoked at the same time.

#### Example:

To simultaneously calculate the minimum, maximum, and average of connection
duration:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'min(duration),max(duration),avg(duration)' conn.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
MIN      MAX         AVG
0.000001 1269.512465 1.6373747834138621
```

### Field Naming

As just shown, by default the result returned by an aggregate function is
placed in a field with the same name as the aggregate function. You may
instead use `:=` to specify an explicit name for the generated field.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'quickest:=min(duration),longest:=max(duration),typical:=avg(duration)' conn.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
QUICKEST LONGEST     TYPICAL
0.000001 1269.512465 1.6373747834138621
```

### Grouping

All aggregate functions may be invoked with one or more
[grouping](../grouping/README.md) options that define the batches of records on
which they operate. If explicit grouping is not used, an aggregate function
will operate over all records in the input stream.

### `where` filtering

A `where` clause may also be added to filter the values on which an aggregate
function will operate.

#### Example:

To check whether we've seen higher DNS round-trip times when servers return
longer lists of `answers`:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'answers != null | every 5m short_rtt:=avg(rtt) where len(answers)<=2, short_count:=count() where len(answers)<=2, long_rtt:=avg(rtt) where len(answers)>2, long_count:=count() where len(answers)>2 | sort ts' dns.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
TS                   SHORT_RTT            SHORT_COUNT LONG_RTT             LONG_COUNT
2018-03-24T17:15:00Z 0.004386461911629731 7628        0.01571223665048545  824
2018-03-24T17:20:00Z 0.006360169034406226 9010        0.01992656544502617  764
2018-03-24T17:25:00Z 0.006063177039132521 8486        0.02742244411764705  680
2018-03-24T17:30:00Z 0.005641562210915819 8652        0.021644265586034935 802
2018-03-24T17:35:00Z 0.008572169213139795 2618        0.01933044954128441  218
```

---

## Available Aggregate Functions

### `and`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Returns the boolean value `true` if the provided expression evaluates to `true` for all inputs. Contrast with [`or`](#or). |
| **Syntax**                | `and(<expression>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<expression>`<br>A valid Zed [expression](../expressions/README.md). |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

Let's say you've been studying `weird` records and noticed that lots of
connections have made one or more bad HTTP requests.

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count() by name | sort -r count' weird.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output head
NAME                                        COUNT
bad_HTTP_request                            11777
line_terminated_with_single_CR              11734
unknown_HTTP_method                         140
above_hole_data_without_any_acks            107
...
```

To count the number of connections for which this was the _only_ category of
`weird` record observed:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'only_bads:=and(name=="bad_HTTP_request") by uid | count() where only_bads==true' weird.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
COUNT
37
```

---

### `any`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return one value observed for a specified field.               |
| **Syntax**                | `any(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To see the `name` of a Zeek `weird` record in our sample data:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'any(name)' weird.log.gz
```

For small inputs that fit in memory, this will typically be the first such
field in the stream, but in general you should not rely upon this.  In this
case, the output is:

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
ANY
TCP_ack_underflow_or_misorder
```

---

### `avg`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the mean (average) of the values of a specified field. Non-numeric values are ignored. |
| **Syntax**                | `avg(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To calculate the average number of bytes originated by all connections as
captured in Zeek `conn` records:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'avg(orig_bytes)' conn.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
AVG
176.9861548654682
```

---

### `collect`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Assemble all input values into an array. Contrast with [`union`](#union). |
| **Syntax**                | `collect(<field-name>)`                                        |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example #1:

To assemble the sequence of HTTP methods invoked in each interaction with the
Bing search engine:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'host=="www.bing.com" | methods:=collect(method) by uid | sort uid' http.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output head
UID                METHODS
C1iilt2FG8PnyEl0bb GET,GET,POST,GET,GET,POST
C31wi6XQB8h9igoa5  GET,GET,POST,POST,POST
CFwagt4ivDe3p6R7U8 GET,GET,POST,POST,GET,GET,GET,POST,POST,GET,GET,GET,GET,POST
CI0SCN14gWpY087KA3 GET,POST,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET
...
```

---

### `count`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the number of records.                                  |
| **Syntax**                | `count([field-name])`                                          |
| **Required<br>arguments** | None                                                           |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | `[field-name]`<br>The name of a field. If specified, only records that contain this field will be counted. |

#### Example #1:

To count the number of records in the entire sample data set:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count()' *.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
COUNT
1462078
```

#### Example #2:

Let's say we wanted to know how many records contain a field called `mime_type`.
The following example shows us that count and that the field is present in
our Zeek `ftp` and `files` records.

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count(mime_type) by _path | filter count > 0 | sort -r count' *.log.gz
```

```mdtest-output
_PATH COUNT
files 162986
ftp   93
```

---

### `countdistinct`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return a quick approximation of the number of unique values of a field.|
| **Syntax**                | `countdistinct(<field-name>)`                                  |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field containing values to be counted. |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |
| **Limitations**           | The potential inaccuracy of the calculated result is described in detail in the code and research linked from the [HyperLogLog repository](https://github.com/axiomhq/hyperloglog).<br><br>Also, partial aggregations are not yet implemented for `countdistinct` ([zed/2743](https://github.com/brimdata/zed/issues/2743)), so it may not work correctly in all circumstances. |

#### Example:

To see an approximate count of unique `uid` values in our sample data set:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'countdistinct(uid)' *
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
COUNTDISTINCT
1029651
```

To see the precise value, which may take longer to execute:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count() by uid | count()' *
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
COUNT
1021953
```

Here we saw the approximation was "off" by 0.75%. On the system that was used
to perform this test, the Zed using `countdistinct()` executed almost 3x faster.

---

### `max`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the maximum value of a specified field. Non-numeric values are ignored. |
| **Syntax**                | `max(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To see the maximum number of bytes originated by any connection in our sample
data:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'max(orig_bytes)' conn.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
MAX
4862366
```

---

### `min`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the minimum value of a specified field. Non-numeric values are ignored. |
| **Syntax**                | `min(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To see the quickest round trip time of all DNS queries observed in our sample
data:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'min(rtt)' dns.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
MIN
0.000012
```

---

### `or`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Returns the boolean value `true` if the provided expression evaluates to `true` for one or more inputs. Contrast with [`and`](#and). |
| **Syntax**                | `or(<expression>)`                                             |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<expression>`<br>A valid Zed [expression](../expressions/README.md). |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

Let's say you've noticed there's lots of HTTP traffic happening on ports higher
than the standard port `80`.

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count() by id.resp_p | sort -r count' http.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output head
ID.RESP_P COUNT
80        134496
8080      5204
5800      1691
65534     903
...
```

The following query confirms this high-port traffic is present, but that none
of those ports are higher than what TCP allows.

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'some_highports:=or(id.resp_p>80),impossible_ports:=or(id.resp_p>65535)' http.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
SOME_HIGHPORTS IMPOSSIBLE_PORTS
T              F
```

---

### `sum`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the total sum of the values of a specified field. Non-numeric values are ignored. |
| **Syntax**                | `sum(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To calculate the total number of bytes across all file payloads logged in our
sample data:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'sum(total_bytes)' files.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
SUM
3092961270
```

---

## `union`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Gather all unique input values into a set. Contrast with [`collect`](#collect). |
| **Syntax**                | `union(<field-name>)`                                          |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |
| **Limitations**           | The data type of the input values must be uniform.             |

#### Example #1:

To observe which HTTP methods were invoked in each interaction with the Bing
search engine:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'host=="www.bing.com" | methods:=union(method) by uid | sort uid' http.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output head
UID                METHODS
C1iilt2FG8PnyEl0bb GET,POST
C31wi6XQB8h9igoa5  GET,POST
CFwagt4ivDe3p6R7U8 GET,POST
CI0SCN14gWpY087KA3 GET,POST
CJcF5E1DVn8FLq5JVc POST
CLsXgZ1W5l9gMzx7e8 GET,POST
CM2qfb4dhM2KJ6uAZk GET
CSOmBD4vJEGRU6pJmg POST
...
```

Commit message:

update language docs with some background/context

docs/language/aggregate-functions/README.md, after:

# Summarize Aggregations

The `summarize` operator performs zero or more aggregations with
zero or more [grouping expressions](../grouping/README.md).
Each aggregation is perform by an
_aggregate function_ that operates on
batches of records to carry out a running computation over the values they
contain.  The `summarize` keyword is optional.

   * [General Usage](#general-usage)
     + [Invoking](#invoking)
     + [Field Naming](#field-naming)
     + [Grouping](#grouping)
     + [`where` filtering](#where-filtering)
   * [Available Aggregate Functions](#available-aggregate-functions)
     + [`and`](#and)
     + [`any`](#any)
     + [`avg`](#avg)
     + [`collect`](#collect)
     + [`count`](#count)
     + [`countdistinct`](#countdistinct)
     + [`max`](#max)
     + [`min`](#min)
     + [`or`](#or)
     + [`sum`](#sum)
     + [`union`](#union)

> **Note:** Per Zed [search syntax](../search-syntax/README.md), many examples
> below use shorthand that leaves off the explicit leading `* |`, matching all
> records before invoking the first element in a pipeline.

## General Usage

### Invoking

Multiple aggregate functions may be invoked at the same time.

#### Example:

To simultaneously calculate the minimum, maximum, and average of connection
duration:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'min(duration),max(duration),avg(duration)' conn.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
MIN      MAX         AVG
0.000001 1269.512465 1.6373747834138621
```

### Field Naming

As just shown, by default the result returned by an aggregate function is
placed in a field with the same name as the aggregate function. You may
instead use `:=` to specify an explicit name for the generated field.

#### Example:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'quickest:=min(duration),longest:=max(duration),typical:=avg(duration)' conn.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
QUICKEST LONGEST     TYPICAL
0.000001 1269.512465 1.6373747834138621
```

### Grouping

All aggregate functions may be invoked with one or more
[grouping](../grouping/README.md) options that define the batches of records on
which they operate. If explicit grouping is not used, an aggregate function
will operate over all records in the input stream.

### `where` filtering

A `where` clause may also be added to filter the values on which an aggregate
function will operate.

#### Example:

To check whether we've seen higher DNS round-trip times when servers return
longer lists of `answers`:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'answers != null | every 5m short_rtt:=avg(rtt) where len(answers)<=2, short_count:=count() where len(answers)<=2, long_rtt:=avg(rtt) where len(answers)>2, long_count:=count() where len(answers)>2 | sort ts' dns.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
TS                   SHORT_RTT            SHORT_COUNT LONG_RTT             LONG_COUNT
2018-03-24T17:15:00Z 0.004386461911629731 7628        0.01571223665048545  824
2018-03-24T17:20:00Z 0.006360169034406226 9010        0.01992656544502617  764
2018-03-24T17:25:00Z 0.006063177039132521 8486        0.02742244411764705  680
2018-03-24T17:30:00Z 0.005641562210915819 8652        0.021644265586034935 802
2018-03-24T17:35:00Z 0.008572169213139795 2618        0.01933044954128441  218
```

---

## Available Aggregate Functions

### `and`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Returns the boolean value `true` if the provided expression evaluates to `true` for all inputs. Contrast with [`or`](#or). |
| **Syntax**                | `and(<expression>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<expression>`<br>A valid Zed [expression](../expressions/README.md). |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

Let's say you've been studying `weird` records and noticed that lots of
connections have made one or more bad HTTP requests.

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count() by name | sort -r count' weird.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output head
NAME                                        COUNT
bad_HTTP_request                            11777
line_terminated_with_single_CR              11734
unknown_HTTP_method                         140
above_hole_data_without_any_acks            107
...
```

To count the number of connections for which this was the _only_ category of
`weird` record observed:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'only_bads:=and(name=="bad_HTTP_request") by uid | count() where only_bads==true' weird.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
COUNT
37
```

---

### `any`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return one value observed for a specified field.               |
| **Syntax**                | `any(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To see the `name` of a Zeek `weird` record in our sample data:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'any(name)' weird.log.gz
```

For small inputs that fit in memory, this will typically be the first such
field in the stream, but in general you should not rely upon this.  In this
case, the output is:

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
ANY
TCP_ack_underflow_or_misorder
```

---

### `avg`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the mean (average) of the values of a specified field. Non-numeric values are ignored. |
| **Syntax**                | `avg(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To calculate the average number of bytes originated by all connections as
captured in Zeek `conn` records:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'avg(orig_bytes)' conn.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
AVG
176.9861548654682
```

---

### `collect`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Assemble all input values into an array. Contrast with [`union`](#union). |
| **Syntax**                | `collect(<field-name>)`                                        |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example #1:

To assemble the sequence of HTTP methods invoked in each interaction with the
Bing search engine:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'host=="www.bing.com" | methods:=collect(method) by uid | sort uid' http.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output head
UID                METHODS
C1iilt2FG8PnyEl0bb GET,GET,POST,GET,GET,POST
C31wi6XQB8h9igoa5  GET,GET,POST,POST,POST
CFwagt4ivDe3p6R7U8 GET,GET,POST,POST,GET,GET,GET,POST,POST,GET,GET,GET,GET,POST
CI0SCN14gWpY087KA3 GET,POST,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET,GET
...
```

---

### `count`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the number of records.                                  |
| **Syntax**                | `count([field-name])`                                          |
| **Required<br>arguments** | None                                                           |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | `[field-name]`<br>The name of a field. If specified, only records that contain this field will be counted. |

#### Example #1:

To count the number of records in the entire sample data set:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count()' *.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
COUNT
1462078
```

#### Example #2:

Let's say we wanted to know how many records contain a field called `mime_type`.
The following example shows us that count and that the field is present in
our Zeek `ftp` and `files` records.

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count(mime_type) by _path | filter count > 0 | sort -r count' *.log.gz
```

```mdtest-output
_PATH COUNT
files 162986
ftp   93
```

---

### `countdistinct`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return a quick approximation of the number of unique values of a field.|
| **Syntax**                | `countdistinct(<field-name>)`                                  |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field containing values to be counted. |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |
| **Limitations**           | The potential inaccuracy of the calculated result is described in detail in the code and research linked from the [HyperLogLog repository](https://github.com/axiomhq/hyperloglog).<br><br>Also, partial aggregations are not yet implemented for `countdistinct` ([zed/2743](https://github.com/brimdata/zed/issues/2743)), so it may not work correctly in all circumstances. |

#### Example:

To see an approximate count of unique `uid` values in our sample data set:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'countdistinct(uid)' *
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
COUNTDISTINCT
1029651
```

To see the precise value, which may take longer to execute:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count() by uid | count()' *
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
COUNT
1021953
```

Here we saw the approximation was "off" by 0.75%. On the system that was used
to perform this test, the Zed using `countdistinct()` executed almost 3x faster.

---

### `max`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the maximum value of a specified field. Non-numeric values are ignored. |
| **Syntax**                | `max(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To see the maximum number of bytes originated by any connection in our sample
data:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'max(orig_bytes)' conn.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
MAX
4862366
```

---

### `min`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the minimum value of a specified field. Non-numeric values are ignored. |
| **Syntax**                | `min(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To see the quickest round trip time of all DNS queries observed in our sample
data:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'min(rtt)' dns.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
MIN
0.000012
```

---

### `or`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Returns the boolean value `true` if the provided expression evaluates to `true` for one or more inputs. Contrast with [`and`](#and). |
| **Syntax**                | `or(<expression>)`                                             |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<expression>`<br>A valid Zed [expression](../expressions/README.md). |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

Let's say you've noticed there's lots of HTTP traffic happening on ports higher
than the standard port `80`.

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'count() by id.resp_p | sort -r count' http.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output head
ID.RESP_P COUNT
80        134496
8080      5204
5800      1691
65534     903
...
```

The following query confirms this high-port traffic is present, but that none
of those ports are higher than what TCP allows.

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'some_highports:=or(id.resp_p>80),impossible_ports:=or(id.resp_p>65535)' http.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
SOME_HIGHPORTS IMPOSSIBLE_PORTS
T              F
```

---

### `sum`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Return the total sum of the values of a specified field. Non-numeric values are ignored. |
| **Syntax**                | `sum(<field-name>)`                                            |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |

#### Example:

To calculate the total number of bytes across all file payloads logged in our
sample data:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'sum(total_bytes)' files.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output
SUM
3092961270
```

---

## `union`

|                           |                                                                |
| ------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Description**           | Gather all unique input values into a set. Contrast with [`collect`](#collect). |
| **Syntax**                | `union(<field-name>)`                                          |
| **Required<br>arguments** | `<field-name>`<br>The name of a field.                         |
| **Optional<br>arguments** | None                                                           |
| **Limitations**           | The data type of the input values must be uniform.             |

#### Example #1:

To observe which HTTP methods were invoked in each interaction with the Bing
search engine:

```mdtest-command zed-sample-data/zeek-default
zq -f table 'host=="www.bing.com" | methods:=union(method) by uid | sort uid' http.log.gz
```

#### Output:
```mdtest-output head
UID                METHODS
C1iilt2FG8PnyEl0bb GET,POST
C31wi6XQB8h9igoa5  GET,POST
CFwagt4ivDe3p6R7U8 GET,POST
CI0SCN14gWpY087KA3 GET,POST
CJcF5E1DVn8FLq5JVc POST
CLsXgZ1W5l9gMzx7e8 GET,POST
CM2qfb4dhM2KJ6uAZk GET
CSOmBD4vJEGRU6pJmg POST
...
```
